# Notes on the Synthesis of Form
Christopher Alexander

The intuitive resolution of contemporary design problems simply lies beyond a single individual's integrative grasp. (5)

There is no legitimate sense in which deductive logic can prescribe physical form for us. (8)

The architectural decisions made within a style are safe from the nagging difficulty of doubt, for the same reason that decisions are easier to make under tradition and taboo than on one's own responsibility. (10)

The innocence, once lost, cannot be regained. The less demands attention, not denial. (11)

Every design problem beings with an effort to acheive fitness between two entities: the form in question and its context. (15)

In practice we see good fit only from a negative point of view. (22)

The only reason we are able to match one thing with another at all is that we rely on a good deal of unexpressed information contained in the statement of the task, and take a great deal for granted. (25)

While it is true that an individual problem can often be solved adequately without regard for the fundamental physical order it implies, we cannot solve a whole net of such problems so casually, and get away with it. (30)

When we admire the simple situation for its good qualities, this doesn't mean that we wish we were back in the same situation. (32)

As form-making proceeds, so the system of variables changes state. One misfit is eradicated, another misfit occurs, and these changes in their turn set off reactions within the system that affect the states of other variables. As form and culture change, state follows state. The sequence of states which the system passes through is a record or history of the adaptation between form and context. (38)

No complex adaptive system will succeed in adapting in a reasonable amount of time unless the adaptation can proceed subsystem by subsystem, each subsystem relatively independent of the others. (41)

The reaction to failure, once so direct, now becomes less and less direct. Materials are no longer close to hand. Buildings are more permanent, frequent repair and readjustment less common, than they used to be. Construction is no longer in the hands of the inhabitants; failures, when they occur, have to be several times reported and described before the specialist will recognize them and make some permanent adjustment. Each of these changes blunts the hair-fine sensitivity of the unselfconscious process' response to failure, so that failures now need to be quite considerable before they will induce correction. (55)

The culture that once was slow-moving, and allowed ample time for adaptation, now changes so rapidly that adaptation cannot keep up with it. (56)

In the unselfconscious system the individual is no more than an agent. He does what he knows how to do as best he can. Very little demand is made of him. He need not himself be able to invent forms at all. All that is required is that he should recognize misfits and respond to them by making minor changes. It is not even necessary that these changes be for the better... The system, being self-adjusting, finds its own equilibrium - provided only that misfits incite some reaction in the craftsman. The forms produced in such a system are not the work of individuals, and their success does not depend on any one man't artistry, but only on the artist's place within the process. (58)

The selfconscious process is different. The artist's selfconscious recognition of his individuality has deep effect on the process of form-making. Each form is now seen as the work of a single man, and its success is his achievement only... (59)

The words we have available to describe the components of these problems are generated by forces in the language, not by the problems, and are therefore rather limited in number and cannot describe more than a few cases correctly. (68)

Once... represented symbolically in verbal terms... they begin seriously to impair our ability to see beyond them. (69)

Caught in a net of language of our own invention, we overestimate the language's impartiality. (70)

In this fashion the selfconscious individual's grasp of problems is constantly misled. His concepts and categories, besides being arbitrary and unsuitable, are self-perpetuating. Under the influence of conocepts, he not only does things from a biased point of view, but sees them biasedly as well. The concepts control his perception of fit and misfit - until in the end he sees nothing but deviations from his conceptual dogmas, and loses not only the urge but even the mental opportunity to frame his problems more appropriately. (70)

The importance of these nonquantifiable variables is sometimes lost ini the effort to be 'scientific'. (98)
